README.md, before:

# Delta Lake Optimization Techniques: A Hands‑On Learning Project

> Independent educational resource; not endorsed by Databricks, Inc. "Databricks" and "Delta Lake" are trademarks of their respective owners.

Follow me on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jrlasak/) for more Databricks projects and tips. Extra material: [dataengineer.wiki](https://dataengineer.wiki)

## 1. Purpose & Overview

Modern lakehouse performance hinges on _layout_ and _file hygiene_. This project is a guided lab that lets you iteratively apply and observe core Delta Lake optimization levers:

- Physical partitioning
- Z-Ordering
- Manual compaction (OPTIMIZE)
- Auto Optimize (optimizeWrites + autoCompact)
- Liquid Clustering
- VACUUM lifecycle hygiene

You will generate a synthetic 5M‑row sales dataset, capture baseline query metrics, then layer techniques—measuring their impact (files scanned, data read, scan time) via the Spark UI and table metadata.

All instructions and code live in the notebook: **[`project.ipynb`](project.ipynb)**. Open it first; proceed cell by cell.

## 2. Learning Objectives

By completing the lab you will be able to:

- Choose between partitioning, Z-Ordering, and Liquid Clustering based on data shape & query patterns
- Diagnose small-file and data-skipping issues using `DESCRIBE DETAIL` + Spark UI
- Apply manual compaction and contrast with auto compaction
- Understand retention safety around VACUUM
- Build a lightweight empirical metrics log to justify optimization choices

## 3. What You Will Build

A sequence of Delta tables representing successive optimization strategies:
| Logical Role | Table Key (see registry) | Technique Illustrated |
|--------------|--------------------------|-----------------------|
| Baseline raw | `sales_raw` | Many small files, unoptimized |
| Country-partitioned | `sales_partitioned` | Low-cardinality partitioning |
| Z-Ordered copy | `sales_raw_zorder` | Multi-column data skipping |
| Fragmented (pre-compaction) | `sales_to_compact` | Small file proliferation |
| Auto Optimize enabled | `sales_auto_compact` | Automatic write sizing + async compaction |
| Liquid Clustered | `sales_liquid_clustered` | Adaptive clustering |

A single helper registry centralizes fully qualified names for reproducibility.

## 4. Architecture & Runtime Assumptions

- Databricks (Community / Free or higher tier). Some VACUUM retention behaviors differ on Free Edition (cannot disable retention safety).
- Spark SQL + PySpark (no external data sources required)
- Delta Lake tables stored in a user-created catalog & schema (created automatically if permitted)

## 5. Prerequisites

- Basic Spark & Delta Lake familiarity (DataFrames, SQL, catalog objects)
- Comfort reading Spark UI (scan details, tasks, input size)
- Python (for minor helper code)

## 6. Getting Started

1. Clone or import this repo into your Databricks workspace.
2. Open `project.ipynb`.
3. Attach a cluster (Photon runtime recommended if available, but not required).
4. Execute cells sequentially. The notebook is idempotent—data generation skips if the base table already exists.
5. After each optimization action, open the Spark UI (SQL / DataFrame tab) and record metrics.

## 7. Metrics Logging (DIY Quick Table)

Create a simple table or spreadsheet to track improvements:
| Step | Technique | Files Scanned | Bytes Read (MB) | Duration (s) | Output Rows | Notes |
|------|-----------|---------------|-----------------|--------------|-------------|-------|
| 2 | Baseline | | | | | |
| 3 | Partitioned (country) | | | | | |
| 4 | Z-Order (cust, prod) | | | | | |
| 5 | Post-Compaction | | | | | |
| 6 | Auto Optimize | | | | | |
| 7 | Liquid Clustering | | | | | |
| 8 | Post-VACUUM | | | | | |

Tip: In Spark UI, click the scan node to see data read & file count; copy into the table above.

## 8. Notebook Step Map

| Notebook Section | Key Action                              | Why It Matters                                         |
| ---------------- | --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| Step 1           | Generate synthetic sales data           | Controlled environment with intentional small files    |
| Step 2           | Baseline query                          | Establish comparative starting point                   |
| Step 3           | Partition by `country`                  | Demonstrate pruning, discuss cardinality trade-offs    |
| Step 4           | Z-Order on (`customer_id`,`product_id`) | Multi-dimensional skipping without partition explosion |
| Step 5           | Manual OPTIMIZE                         | Show compaction impact on small file overhead          |
| Step 6           | Auto Optimize                           | Reduce ops toil for continuous ingestion               |
| Step 7           | Liquid Clustering                       | Adaptive clustering vs scheduled Z-Order               |
| Step 8           | VACUUM                                  | Safe file lifecycle & retention considerations         |
| Cleanup          | Optional DROP CATALOG                   | Reclaim resources                                      |

## 9. Heuristics & Decision Cheatsheet

- Start with _minimal_ partitioning (low cardinality, high filter selectivity)
- Use Z-Order for 1–4 frequently filtered moderate/high-cardinality columns
- Prefer Liquid Clustering when predicates evolve or incremental churn is high
- Monitor: `numFiles`, average file size (total size / numFiles), skew in partition directories
- Manual OPTIMIZE for bursty historical loads; rely on Auto Optimize for trickle appends
- Keep VACUUM retention ≥ 7 days in production (time travel + streaming safety)

## 10. Common Pitfalls

| Pitfall                               | Consequence                          | Mitigation                                                      |
| ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Over-partitioning (thousands of dirs) | Driver metadata pressure, tiny files | Consolidate, consider Z-Order/Liquid instead                    |
| Z-Ordering too often                  | Unnecessary rewrite cost             | Trigger when new data fraction crosses threshold (e.g., 20–30%) |
| Disabling VACUUM safety in prod       | Data loss risk for late readers      | Maintain retention policy & document RPO/RTO                    |
| Ignoring file size drift              | Increasing latency                   | Schedule compaction or enable autoOptimize                      |

## 11. Extending the Lab

Try adding:

1. Date-based partition layer vs country: compare scan metrics.
2. Programmatic metrics capture notebook that stores results into a Delta table for plotting trends.
3. Incremental data growth simulation + periodic Z-Order refresh policy.
4. Photon vs non-Photon runtime comparison (CPU cost vs performance).
5. Streaming ingestion (Auto Loader) to stress clustering adaptiveness.

## 12. Feedback Wanted

I want this to be maximally useful for learners. After running the notebook, please consider opening a Discussion or Issue with:

1. Were the notebook instructions clear at each step? Where did you pause or re-read?
2. Which optimization concept remained fuzzy, and what supporting visual or explanation would help?
3. Would a short video walkthrough add value, or do you prefer self-discovery?

Happy to credit you as a contributor if you provide actionable feedback.

## 13. Troubleshooting Quick Tips

| Symptom                                 | Possible Cause                       | Action                                                                      |
| --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Baseline table regenerates unexpectedly | Catalog/schema context lost          | Re-run config cell to `USE CATALOG` + `USE SCHEMA`                          |
| Z-Order command not found               | Wrong runtime / missing Delta extras | Ensure cluster has Delta support (DBR 11+ recommended)                      |
| VACUUM removed no files                 | Retention window not elapsed         | Check history timestamps; wait or (demo only) lower retention (not on Free) |
| Minimal scan improvement after Z-Order  | Predicate low selectivity            | Test narrower filters; ensure chosen columns are in WHERE                   |

## 14. Cleanup

Run the final cleanup cell (commented by default) to drop the entire catalog if you want to fully reset.

```sql
-- Optional
-- DROP CATALOG IF EXISTS delta_optimization_project CASCADE;
```

## 15. Disclaimer

Educational sample only. Adapt sizing, retention, and operational policies before applying to production.

---

Open `project.ipynb` now and start with the configuration cell. Record metrics; experimentation beats theory. Enjoy!

Commit message:

Enhance getting started instructions in README: add steps for creating a Databricks account and importing the repository.

README.md, after:

# 6 Delta Lake Optimization Techniques: A Hands‑On Learning Project

> Independent educational resource; not endorsed by Databricks, Inc. "Databricks" and "Delta Lake" are trademarks of their respective owners.

Follow me on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jrlasak/) for more Databricks projects and tips. Extra material: [dataengineer.wiki](https://dataengineer.wiki)

## 1. Purpose & Overview

Modern lakehouse performance hinges on _layout_ and _file hygiene_. This project is a guided lab that lets you iteratively apply and observe core Delta Lake optimization levers:

- Physical partitioning
- Z-Ordering
- Manual compaction (OPTIMIZE)
- Auto Optimize (optimizeWrites + autoCompact)
- Liquid Clustering
- VACUUM lifecycle hygiene

You will generate a synthetic 5M‑row sales dataset, capture baseline query metrics, then layer techniques—measuring their impact (files scanned, data read, scan time) via the Spark UI and table metadata.

All instructions and code live in the notebook: **[`project.ipynb`](project.ipynb)**. Open it first; proceed cell by cell.

## 2. Learning Objectives

By completing the lab you will be able to:

- Choose between partitioning, Z-Ordering, and Liquid Clustering based on data shape & query patterns
- Diagnose small-file and data-skipping issues using `DESCRIBE DETAIL` + Spark UI
- Apply manual compaction and contrast with auto compaction
- Understand retention safety around VACUUM
- Build a lightweight empirical metrics log to justify optimization choices

## 3. What You Will Build

A sequence of Delta tables representing successive optimization strategies:
| Logical Role | Table Key (see registry) | Technique Illustrated |
|--------------|--------------------------|-----------------------|
| Baseline raw | `sales_raw` | Many small files, unoptimized |
| Country-partitioned | `sales_partitioned` | Low-cardinality partitioning |
| Z-Ordered copy | `sales_raw_zorder` | Multi-column data skipping |
| Fragmented (pre-compaction) | `sales_to_compact` | Small file proliferation |
| Auto Optimize enabled | `sales_auto_compact` | Automatic write sizing + async compaction |
| Liquid Clustered | `sales_liquid_clustered` | Adaptive clustering |

A single helper registry centralizes fully qualified names for reproducibility.

## 4. Architecture & Runtime Assumptions

- Databricks (Community / Free or higher tier). Some VACUUM retention behaviors differ on Free Edition (cannot disable retention safety).
- Spark SQL + PySpark (no external data sources required)
- Delta Lake tables stored in a user-created catalog & schema (created automatically if permitted)

## 5. Prerequisites

- Basic Spark & Delta Lake familiarity (DataFrames, SQL, catalog objects)
- Comfort reading Spark UI (scan details, tasks, input size)
- Python (for minor helper code)

## 6. Getting Started

1. **Create a Databricks Account**

   - Sign up for a [Databricks Free Edition account](https://www.databricks.com/learn/free-edition) if you don’t already have one.
   - Familiarize yourself with the workspace, clusters, and notebook interface.

2. **Import this repository to Databricks**

   - In Databricks, go to the Workspace sidebar and click the "Repos" section, click "Add Repo".
     - Alternatively, go to your personal folder, click "create" and select "git folder".
   - Paste the GitHub URL for this repository.
   - Authenticate with GitHub if prompted, and select the main branch.
   - The repo will appear as a folder in your workspace, allowing you to edit, run notebooks, and manage files directly from Databricks.
   - For more details, see the official Databricks documentation: [Repos in Databricks](https://docs.databricks.com/repos/index.html).

3. Open `project.ipynb`.
4. Execute cells sequentially - pick the serverless cluster. The notebook is idempotent—data generation skips if the base table already exists.
5. After each optimization action, open the Spark UI (SQL / DataFrame tab) and record metrics.

## 7. Metrics Logging (DIY Quick Table)

Create a simple table or spreadsheet to track improvements:
| Step | Technique | Files Scanned | Bytes Read (MB) | Duration (s) | Output Rows | Notes |
|------|-----------|---------------|-----------------|--------------|-------------|-------|
| 2 | Baseline | | | | | |
| 3 | Partitioned (country) | | | | | |
| 4 | Z-Order (cust, prod) | | | | | |
| 5 | Post-Compaction | | | | | |
| 6 | Auto Optimize | | | | | |
| 7 | Liquid Clustering | | | | | |
| 8 | Post-VACUUM | | | | | |

Tip: In Spark UI, click the scan node to see data read & file count; copy into the table above.

## 8. Notebook Step Map

| Notebook Section | Key Action                              | Why It Matters                                         |
| ---------------- | --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| Step 1           | Generate synthetic sales data           | Controlled environment with intentional small files    |
| Step 2           | Baseline query                          | Establish comparative starting point                   |
| Step 3           | Partition by `country`                  | Demonstrate pruning, discuss cardinality trade-offs    |
| Step 4           | Z-Order on (`customer_id`,`product_id`) | Multi-dimensional skipping without partition explosion |
| Step 5           | Manual OPTIMIZE                         | Show compaction impact on small file overhead          |
| Step 6           | Auto Optimize                           | Reduce ops toil for continuous ingestion               |
| Step 7           | Liquid Clustering                       | Adaptive clustering vs scheduled Z-Order               |
| Step 8           | VACUUM                                  | Safe file lifecycle & retention considerations         |
| Cleanup          | Optional DROP CATALOG                   | Reclaim resources                                      |

## 9. Heuristics & Decision Cheatsheet

- Start with _minimal_ partitioning (low cardinality, high filter selectivity)
- Use Z-Order for 1–4 frequently filtered moderate/high-cardinality columns
- Prefer Liquid Clustering when predicates evolve or incremental churn is high
- Monitor: `numFiles`, average file size (total size / numFiles), skew in partition directories
- Manual OPTIMIZE for bursty historical loads; rely on Auto Optimize for trickle appends
- Keep VACUUM retention ≥ 7 days in production (time travel + streaming safety)

## 10. Common Pitfalls

| Pitfall                               | Consequence                          | Mitigation                                                      |
| ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Over-partitioning (thousands of dirs) | Driver metadata pressure, tiny files | Consolidate, consider Z-Order/Liquid instead                    |
| Z-Ordering too often                  | Unnecessary rewrite cost             | Trigger when new data fraction crosses threshold (e.g., 20–30%) |
| Disabling VACUUM safety in prod       | Data loss risk for late readers      | Maintain retention policy & document RPO/RTO                    |
| Ignoring file size drift              | Increasing latency                   | Schedule compaction or enable autoOptimize                      |

## 11. Extending the Lab

Try adding:

1. Date-based partition layer vs country: compare scan metrics.
2. Programmatic metrics capture notebook that stores results into a Delta table for plotting trends.
3. Incremental data growth simulation + periodic Z-Order refresh policy.
4. Photon vs non-Photon runtime comparison (CPU cost vs performance).
5. Streaming ingestion (Auto Loader) to stress clustering adaptiveness.

## 12. Feedback Wanted

I want this to be maximally useful for learners. After running the notebook, please consider opening a Discussion or Issue with:

1. Were the notebook instructions clear at each step? Where did you pause or re-read?
2. Which optimization concept remained fuzzy, and what supporting visual or explanation would help?
3. Would a short video walkthrough add value, or do you prefer self-discovery?

Happy to credit you as a contributor if you provide actionable feedback.

## 13. Troubleshooting Quick Tips

| Symptom                                 | Possible Cause                       | Action                                                                      |
| --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Baseline table regenerates unexpectedly | Catalog/schema context lost          | Re-run config cell to `USE CATALOG` + `USE SCHEMA`                          |
| Z-Order command not found               | Wrong runtime / missing Delta extras | Ensure cluster has Delta support (DBR 11+ recommended)                      |
| VACUUM removed no files                 | Retention window not elapsed         | Check history timestamps; wait or (demo only) lower retention (not on Free) |
| Minimal scan improvement after Z-Order  | Predicate low selectivity            | Test narrower filters; ensure chosen columns are in WHERE                   |

## 14. Cleanup

Run the final cleanup cell (commented by default) to drop the entire catalog if you want to fully reset.

```sql
-- Optional
-- DROP CATALOG IF EXISTS delta_optimization_project CASCADE;
```

## 15. Disclaimer

Educational sample only. Adapt sizing, retention, and operational policies before applying to production.

---

Open `project.ipynb` now and start with the configuration cell. Record metrics; experimentation beats theory. Enjoy!
